5th International Conference on Digital Libraries for Musicology, Paris 2018

9.30am - 5.30pm, Friday 28th September, 2018

Institut de Recherche et Coordination Acoustique/Musique (IRCAM), Paris, France

A satellite event of ISMIR 2018.

News

-   Welcome to DLfM 2018! Our proceedings are now available on the workshop website.
-   Attendees: please ensure you bring valid photo ID for a security check at IRCAM before the programme stats at 09:30. Address: 1, Place Igor-Stravinsky, 75004 Paris.
-   Registration for DLfM 2018 has closed ~~will close on Sunday 23rd September (23:59 GMT)~~ or when we reach maximum capacity, whichever is sooner. Places are filling up, so register now to secure your place! We must finalise catering and access lists after this date, so regret that we will not be accepting on site registrations.
-   03/09/2018: The DLfM 2018 programme is now available online. Remember to register for the conference at our online store.
-   01/08/2018: Registration for DLfM 2018 is now open for booking at the Oxford Online Store. The registration fee is £50 and will include access to the conference proceedings, tea/coffee breaks, and lunch. The conference programme is due to be published in August.
-   09/06/2018: Deadline extension. Please submit an abstract to easychair by 19th June. Authors of abstracts submitted by this date will be able to upload their papers until 24th June.
-   09/06/2018: Details of registration fees for DLfM 2018 will be announced in July, but are expected to be of a similar cost to those in previous years. Registration for DLfM will not require registration for ISMIR, although we encourage attendance at both conferences!
-   26/05/2018: Submission of papers for DLfM 2018 through Easychair is now open!
-   30/04/2018: We are pleased to announce that, as in previous years, DLfM proceedings will be included in the ACM Digital Library through the ICPS series. This year we are happy to add that the DLfM 2018 proceedings will also be made available as Open Access proceedings through the ACM DL.
-   19/03/2018: In 2018 DLfM calls for paper submissions to two tracks: a ‘proceedings track’ for short and full papers; and a ‘Unlocking Musicology challenge’ track for position papers reporting novel digital routes for disseminating and engaging musicology beyond academia. Full details are provided below.  
-   19/03/2018: Colleagues particularly interested in modelling audio and music, or are using semantic web technologies in their music-related research are also encouraged to consider our sister workshop, Semantic Applications for Audio and Music to be held at Monterey, California on October 9, 2018.

Call for papers

Many Digital Libraries have long offered facilities to provide multimedia content, including music. However there is now an ever more urgent need to specifically support the distinct multiple forms of music, the links between them, and the surrounding scholarly context, as required by the transformed and extended methods being applied to musicology and the wider Digital Humanities.

 

The Digital Libraries for Musicology (DLfM) conference presents a venue specifically for those working on, and with, Digital Library systems and content in the domain of music and musicology. This includes Music Digital Library systems, their application and use in musicology, technologies for enhanced access and organisation of musics in Digital Libraries, bibliographic and metadata for music, intersections with music Linked Data, and the challenges of working with the multiple representations of music across large-scale digital collections such as the Internet Archive and HathiTrust.

This, the fifth Digital Libraries for Musicology conference, follows previous workshops in London, Knoxville, New York, and Shanghai. In 2018, DLfM is again proud to be a satellite event of the annual International Society for Music Information Retrieval (ISMIR) conference also being held in Paris, and in particular encourages reports on the use of MIR methods and technologies within Music Digital Library systems when applied to the pursuit of musicological research.

Scope and objectives

DLfM will focuses on the implications of music for Digital Libraries and Digital Libraries research when pushing the boundaries of contemporary musicology, including the application of techniques as reported in more technologically-oriented fora such as ISMIR and ICMC.

This will be the fifth edition of DLfM following very successful and well received previous workshops (in 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017), giving an opportunity for the community to present and discuss recent developments that address the challenges of effectively combining technology with musicology through Digital Library systems and their application.

The conference objectives are:

-   to act as a forum for reporting, presenting, and evaluating this work and disseminating new approaches to advance the discipline;
-   to create a venue for critically and constructively evaluating and verifying the operation of Music Digital Libraries and the applications and findings that flow from them;
-   to consider the suitability of existing Music Digital Libraries, particularly in light of the transformative methods and applications emerging from musicology, large collections of both audio and music related data, ‘big data’ method, and MIR;
-   to explore how digital libraries and digital musicology can combine to offer richer online access to online music collections;
-   to set the agenda for work in the field to address these new challenges and opportunities.

Topics

Topics of interest include, but are not limited to:

-   Building and managing digital music collections
    -   Optical Music Recognition
    -   Information literacies for Music Digital Libraries
    -   Data quality assessment
-   Access, interfaces and ergonomics
    -   Interfaces and access mechanisms for Music Digital Libraries
    -   Identification/location of music (in all forms) in generic Digital Libraries
    -   Techniques for locating and accessing music in Very Large Digital Libraries (e.g. HathiTrust, Internet Archive) and musical corpus-building at scale
    -   Mechanisms for combining multi-form music content within and between Digital Libraries and other digital resources
    -   User information needs and behaviour for Music Digital Libraries
-   Musicological Knowledge
    -   Music data representations, including manuscripts/scores and audio
    -   Applied MIR techniques in Music Digital Libraries and musicological investigations using them
    -   Extraction of musical concepts from symbolic notation and audio data
    -   Metadata and metadata schemas for music
    -   Application of Linked Data and Semantic Web techniques to Music Digital Libraries, and for their access and organisation
    -   Ontologies and categorisation of musics and music artefacts
-   Improving data for musicology
    -   Digital Libraries which enrich public access to music, music-cultural, and music-ephemera material online
    -   Digital Libraries in support of musicology and other scholarly study; novel requirements and methodologies therein
    -   Digital Libraries for combination of resources in support of musicology (e.g. combining audio, scores, bibliographic, geographic, ethnomusicology, performance, etc.)

Submissions

Papers for either track will be peer reviewed by 2-3 members of the programme committee.

Please submit an abstract to EasyChair by 19th June, and produce your paper using the ACM template and submit it to DLfM on EasyChair by 24th June 2018 (see IMPORTANT DATES).

All submitted papers must:

-   be written in English;
-   contain author names, affiliations and e-mail addresses;
-   be formatted according to the ACM SIG Proceedings template, using a Type 1 font no smaller than 9pt;
-   be in PDF format (please ensure that the PDF can be viewed on any platform), and formatted for A4 size.

Page limits for submitted papers apply to all text, but exclude the bibliography (i.e. references can be included on pages over the specified limits).

It is the authors’ responsibility to ensure that their submissions adhere strictly to the required format. Submissions that do not comply with the above requirements may be rejected without review.

Please note that at least one author from each accepted paper must attend the conference to present their work.

-   ACM template: https://www.acm.org/publications/proceedings-template
-   Submissions: https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=dlfm2018
-   Contact email: dlfm2018@easychair.org

 

Please use the ‘ACM Standard’ version of the ‘ACM proceedings template’ – for MS Word, see ACM_SigConf, for LaTeX, sample-sigconf.

Submissions: Proceedings track

We invite full papers (up to 8 pages excluding reference) or short and position papers (up to 4 pages excluding references). In addition to the general submission requirements above, we will require that camera-ready copy be received before 24th August 2018 (see IMPORTANT DATES), and that at least one author per accepted paper is registered for DLfM by that date.

Submissions: Unlocking Musicology Challenge

How can the methods and techniques of Digital Musicology, applied through Music Digital Libraries, be used to increase awareness and access to digital music and associated ephemera in non-academic contexts? How can Music Digital Libraries offer enhanced mechanisms by which the public can explore collections of music and music-related material, showing that digital musicology provides sound approaches for doing so? How can digital musicology approaches, and the tools that implement them, be translated into commercial and third sector applications?

The Unlocking Musicology Challenge solicits short position papers addressing these questions as submissions of up to 2 pages to DLfM (see SUBMISSIONS).

Unlocking Musicology Challenge papers will be peer reviewed, and accepted papers will be presented at the conference as either part of a panel or as poster. Challenge papers will not be included in the main DLfM proceedings, but will be compiled into a supplement hosted on the conference website.

While we encourage authors to engage with DLfM through the Unlocking Musicology Challenge track, those who wish their papers to appear in the main proceedings may prefer to submit a more detailed description of their work to the Proceedings Track as a short or long paper (see above).

Important dates

-   Abstract submission deadline (extended): 19th June (23:59 UTC-11)
-   Paper submission deadline (extended; for papers with an abstract submitted by 19th June): 24th June 2018 (23:59 UTC-11)
-   Notification of acceptance: 27th July 2018
-   Camera ready submission deadline: 24th August 2018
-   Conference: 28th September 2018

Conference organisation

Programme Chair

Kevin Page, University of Oxford

Local Chairs

Cécile Davy-Rigaux, IReMus UMR 8223 (CNRS — Sorbonne Université — Bibliothèque nationale de France — ministère de la Culture et de la Communication)

Christophe Guillotel-Nothmann, IReMus UMR 8223 (CNRS — Sorbonne Université — Bibliothèque nationale de France — ministère de la Culture et de la Communication)

Publicity and proceedings Chair

David Lewis, University of Oxford

Programme Committee

Alessandro Adamou, Knowledge Media Institute, The Open University
Islah Ali-Maclachlan, Birmingham City University
David Bainbridge, University of Waikato
Daniel Bangert, Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek, Göttingen
Rafael Caro Repetto, Music Technology Group, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona
Richard Chesser, British Library
Tim Crawford, Goldsmiths College
Johanna Devaney, The Ohio State University
Jürgen Diet, Bavarian State Library
J. Stephen Downie, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Tim Duguid, University of Glasgow
Yun Fan, Répertoire International de Littérature Musicale
Ichiro Fujinaga, McGill University
Axel Geertinger, Royal Danish Library
Francesca Giannetti, Rutgers University
Mark Gotham, University of Cambridge
Andrew Hankinson, University of Oxford
Xiao Hu, University of Hong Kong
Charles Inskip, University College London
Frauke Jürgensen, University of Aberdeen
Anna Kent-Muller, University of Southampton
Audrey Laplante, EBSI, Université de Montréal
Pasquale Lisena, ERECOM
Alan Marsden, Lancaster University
Joshua Neumann, University of Florida
Alastair Porter, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Laurent Pugin, RISM Switzerland
Andreas Rauber, Vienna University of Technology
David Rizo, University of Alicante
Amelie Roper, British Library
Sertan Şentürk, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Reinier de Valk, Jukedeck R&D
Raffaele Viglianti, University of Maryland
David Weigl, University of Oxford
Tillman Weyde, City University

DLfM 2018 is kindly supported by:

[Logo for Institut de recherche en musicologie (IReMus)]

 

[University of Oxford e-Research Centre logos]

 

[fast logo]

 

[TROMPA]

 
